We want to create
a function that
takes a year as an
argument and returns
true when that year is a
leap year, false otherwise.
Let's get started.
We start from the
skeleton programme.
It just has four
print statements,
one for each particular year.
So 1899 would of course not
be a leap year, 1936 would be,
1900 is not a leap
year, but 2000 is.
So the task which
remains is of course
to implement the
function is_leap_year.
So in the programme
compilation unit,
we add the contains key word.
Contains then is followed
by any number of procedures,
which we want to define in the
compilation unit and programme.
So in this particular
case, it's a function.
Its name is is_leap_year.
Its argument is year,
and its return value
is of type logical.
So we use implicit
none in order to ensure
that all local variables in
this compilation unit function
have to be declared explicitly.
The argument year
is of type integer.
The function is ended with
end function is_leap_year,
and there is just a single
statement, an assignment
of the return value.
In this case, the logical value
false to the function name,
so that ensures
the return value.
Let's compile and
run the programme.
And as you can see, we
get the correct result
for a couple of years but of
course, not for all of them.
But in general,
this is not too bad
because given that only one year
in four at most is a leap year,
we actually get
the correct results
for more than 75 percent of
all possible cases, which
is not bad for just a
single line of code.
However, let's try to
do a little bit better.
We use an if statement.
That if statement is going
to check a condition.
The condition is that the
remainder of dividing year by 4
is equal to 0, that would mean
that a year is divisible by 4
and hence that it
is a leap year.
So we have if our
condition then is_leap_year
is assigned the
value true, else--
so basically if the
remainder by division of 4
is not equal to zero,
then it's not a leap year.
And we set is_leap_year to
the logical value false,
and the if statement
is ended by and if.
When we compile and
run the code you
see that indeed the
results get better.
However, we have to refine
the logic a little bit,
because we are not there yet.
So if a year is
divisible by 4, then we
need to check whether
it's divisible by 100.
If it's divisible by 100,
and it is divisible by 400,
then is_leap_year is true.
Otherwise, it's false.
So 1900 would not be a leap
year, while 2000 would be.
And of course, if the year
is not divisible by 100
and it's divisible by
4, then it's leap year.
And this logic is complete.
Note that nested if statements
are very easy to distinguish
because we always
have if and then
and if, so that
makes it quite easy.
And of course if you use proper
indentation, although that's
not really a requirement
in Fortran,
it really helps how
readable your code is.
It improves things quite a lot.
Again, we can compile
and run the code
and now you see that we get
the correct results for each
of the years.
Just to make the point that
an if statement doesn't
need to have an else
part, we include
a check that the year
is less than 1582,
because that was when
the current calendar was
introduced, and basically
we print a warning
whenever we enter
a year which is
less than that particular year.
And when we compile
and run this,
you see that indeed for
1502 a warning is printed.
Of course, we could have
implemented this function
without the nested if statement.
And if you've never done it,
it makes for a good exercise.
Also there is a lot more
to say about proper error
handling, writing warnings,
and dealing with actual errors.
And as mentioned
before, we'll definitely
talk a lot more
about functions soon.